\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename i-iterate.info
@settitle Macro system for iterating
@c %**end of header

@copying
This is the i-iterate developer documentation.

Copyright (C) 2012 Oleg Sivokon

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without
modification, are permitted in any medium without royalty
provided the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title i-iterate developer documentation
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top i-iterate developer documentation

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

i-iterate is a macro system inspired by the Common Lisp
@url{http://common-lisp.net/project/iterate, iterate} package. However it
deliberately adds, omits or renames parts of the macro, such as to make
it more applicable in the context of Emacs Lisp.

The homepage (the code repository, actually) can be found
@url{http://code.google.com/p/i-iterate/, here}.

If you found bugs or want a particular feature, you can contact the author
@email{olegsivokon@@gmail.com}.

@strong{Rationale}

Iteration is one of the most common tasks a programmer will
be facing when writing programs of any complexity. Some iteration
patterns are more common then others, but when facing a less common task
a programmer would have to re-invent the strategy for solving it. Having
these, or just more of these strategies ``canned'' would be thus helpful
for reducing the amount of work and to allow the programmer to better
concentrate on the purpose on the program, rather then the technical details.
As an example, you can think of a task of iterating over the characters
of a string in reverse order. 

@example
(let* ((input "input")
       (iterator (1- (length input))))
  (while (>= iterator 0)
    (write-char (aref input iterator))
    (decf iterator)))
@end example

Notice that in order to do so, you had to create a ``technical'' variable
@code{iterator} and to perform many ``boring'' operations that increase the
verbosity of your code, hiding the intention.

Compare this to the @code{++} macro for the same task:

@example
(++ (for i reverse "input")
    (write-char i))
@end example

The technical variable @code{iterator} is now gone, the details of
iteration are now gone too. Effectively, it only shows what you need to
know about the code.

@strong{General Concepts}

The @code{++} macro creates special environment, where your code is expanded.
In this environment, it declares a number of constructs it interprets in
a particular way. Two major categories of these constructs are the
@strong{drivers} and @strong{keywords}. Drivers can only occur at the
top-level definition, while keywords are generally allowed everywhere, unless
otherwise specified.

@menu
* Drivers::  The top-level forms driving the iteration
* Keywords:: The forms available inside the iteration
@end menu

@node Drivers
@chapter The top-level forms driving the iteration

Drivers are the s-expressions that describe iterative tasks. They usually
begin with the prefix, that describes the purpose of the driver, which then
can be followed by either the variables this driver operates on, the symbols
that describe details about the action performed by the driver, and, some times
the datum.

Example:

@code{(for i in '(1 2 3 4) by #'cddr)}

@code{for} is the prefix, which describes the selection of the driver.
@code{in} and @code{by} are the symbols that specify how exactly the driver
should function (@code{in} means it should iterate over @code{car}s and
@code{by} means it should use the following datum for selecting the next
list cell.)
@code{i} is a variable of this driver. Variables record the state of the
iteration. In this example, @code{i} would be set to 1 and 3.
@code{#'cddr} is the datum, in the context of this driver it is treated
as a function to select the next list cell.

@strong{List of available drivers}

@menu 
* for::       A multi-purpose driver for doing variety of things.
* with::      A driver for variable declaration.
* generate::  A general purpose generator driver.
* repeat::    A simple driver for performing iteration N number of items.
* finally::   A driver that runs when the iteration finishes normally.
* initially:: A driver that runs before any code in the iteration.
@end menu

@node for
@section Multi-purpose driver

This driver can perform many different task. Each of these tasks usually
has it's own continuation. Below is the list of the existing (or planned)
continuations. For examples of how to implement your own continuation see
@defmac i-add-for-handler name arguments &optional driver
&rest handler [doc-string]
@end defmac

@strong{For continuations}

@menu
* in on::                     Iterates over lists.
* upfrom from downfrom::      Iterates numerically.
* across reverse binary::     Iterates over arrays.
* depth-first breadth-first:: Iterates over trees.
* keys values pairs::         Iterates over hash-tables.
* random::                    Produces unique random each iteration.
* chars words lines::         Iterates over entities in buffer.
* permutations::              Generates permutation of an array.
* dot-product join distinct:: Iterates over sets.
@end menu

@node with
@section Variable declaration

This driver is very similar to @code{let*} in effect. It allows you
to declare variables you can use later inside other drivers. It can
be particularly useful when you need to initialize the variables you
are collecting into with some values, before the first collection can
occur.

@example
(++ (with ((a (let ((x 0)) 
                (map 'vector (lambda (y) (+ y (incf x)))
                     (make-vector 10 0))))
           (b 100) c))
  (for i across a)
  (message "b - i: %s, c: %s" (- b i) c))
@end example

This example initializes the variable @code{a} to be an array of a length
of 100 and loops over the values in the created array.

@node generate
@section User-provided generators

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node repeat
@section Repeats the code N times

This driver uses the form of @code{(repeat N)}, where N is the number of
times to run the body of the macro.

@example
(++ (repeat 100) (message "Hello, world!"))
@end example

This example will print the line ``Hello, world'' 100 times.

@node finally
@section Runs the epilogue code

This driver is executed after the iteration had finished in a regular way.
The syntax of this driver is @code{(finally EXPRESSION)} where EXPRESSION
is any Lisp code.

@example
(++ (for i from 1 to 10 by 3)
  (message "i: %s" i)
  (finally (message "i: %s" (* i 2))))
@end example

This example will print ``1, 4, 7, 10, 26''

@node initially
@section Runs the prologue code

This driver is not implemented yet

@comment Keyword nodes

@node in on
@subsection Iterates over lists

This for continuation uses the syntax @code{(for VARIABLES in|on [by ITERATOR])}
@code{VARIABLES} are interpreted as follows:
If it is a symbol, it names a variable, if the continuation is @code{in}, then
it points to @code{car} of the list cell being iterated, it points to the list
itself otherwise.

If it is a proper list and the continuation is @code{in}, then it is a list of
variables, which are bound to the @code{car}s of the lists that constitute the
list being iterated, otherwise they point to subsequent cells of the list being
iterated.

If it is a cons cell with non-nil @code{cdr} cell and the continuation is
@code{in}, then it is bound to @code{car} and @code{cdr} of the cells of the
list being iterated, otherwise it is bound to the cell being iterated and the
rest of the list.

If ITERATOR is not nil, then it is taken to be a function that must be applied
to the list being iterated to obtain the pointer to the next cell.

@example
(++ (for i on '(1 2 3 4) by #'cddr)
  (when (oddp (car i))
    (return (* (car i) 7))))
@end example

This example will set @code{i} to (1 2 3 4), (2 3 4), (3 4), (4) in turns, and
if the value of @code{(car i)} happens to be odd, will terminate the iteration
and return that value multiplied by 7. Since 1 is odd, the value returned is 7.

@node upfrom from downfrom
@subsection Numerical iteration

This continuation uses this syntax:
@code{(for VARIABLE from|downfrom|upfrom [to|upto|below LIMIT [by STEP]])}.
Where VARIABLE is a variable set to the subsequent products of the iteration.
@code{from} and @code{upfrom} are synonymous. If you use @code{from} with no
further arguments, then the default is to iterate by one upwards, and if you
use @code{downfrom} with no arguments, then the default is to decrease the
variable by one at each step. @code{to} implies that the LIMIT is inclusive
and must happen during the iteration, @code{upto} implies that only the values
strictly less then LIMIT can happen during iteration, @code{below} implies
that the values below the limit as well as the limit itself will happen during
the iteration.

@example
(++ (for i from 0 to 10) (message "i: %s" i))
@end example

This example will iterate over values 0..10 inclusive and print them.

@node across reverse binary
@subsection Iterate over arrays

This continuation can take following forms:
@code{(for VARIABLES across|reverse|binary ARRAY)}, where VARIABLES can be
a symbol or a list of symbols. In the later case, subsequent symbols are
taken to mean array dimensions. I.e. if the VARIABLES is (A B), then the
array is assumed to have at least two dimensions, and the code generated will
attempt to iterate over the second dimension too. In the later case, other
body expression are run inside the innermost loop.

@code{reverse} and @code{binary} are not implemented yet.

@example
(++ (for i across [1 2 3 4]) (message "i: %d" i))
@end example

This example will iterate over the elements of @code{[1 2 3 4]} array and
print them.

@node depth-first breadth-first
@subsection Iterate over trees

As the name suggests, these drivers iterate over trees in either depth-first
or breadth-first order (both happen linearly, no recursion involved). These
drivers use syntax: @code{(for VARIABLE depth-first|breadth-first TREE)}.
The VARIABLE is set to leafs only in either case.

@example
(++ (for i depth-first
         '((1 (2 3) ((4) 5) ((((6 7 8))) 9 10 (11)))))
  (message "i: %s" i))
@end example

This example will print ``i: 1, i: 2, i: 3, i: 4, i: 5, i: 6, i: 7, i: 8,
i: 9, i: 10, i: 11''.

@node keys values pairs
@subsection Iterate over hash-table

This driver iterates over hash-table, it is possible to iterate only over
the keys, the values, or both. The syntax used is:
@code{(for VARIABLES keys|values|pairs HASH-TABLE)}, where VARIABLES can
be either a symbol, in which case it will be set to whichever continuation
you choose, or a list of two symbols. In the later case, the first element
of the list is taken to be the variable for keys, and the second is the
variable for values.

@example
(++ (for (a b) pairs test-hash limit 100)
  (collect (cons a b))
  (message "a: %s, b: %s" a b))
@end example

This example will iterate over a hash-table @code{test-hash} and collect
its keys into an alist, with keys being the in the @code{car} position and
values being in @code{cdr} position.

@node random
@subsection Generate N unique random numbers

This continuation will generate unique random numbers during iteration,
it uses syntax: @code{(for VARIABLE random LOW to HIGH)}, where
VARIABLE is the variable that will be set to the next random number,
LOW is the lower bound and HIGH is the higher bound of the numbers being
generated.

@example
(++ (with ((s (make-string 90 ?-))))
  (for i random 10 to 100)
  (aset s (- i 10) ?x)
  (message "%s" s))
@end example

This example will print 90 lines 90 characters long, originally
containing only ``-'' characters, but being randomly replaced by ``x''
character. The last line should be entirely replaced with ``x''
characters.

@node chars words lines
@subsection Iterate over characters, words or lines in a buffer

This continuation iterates over characters, words or lines using
Emacs navigation commands, @code{forward-char}, @code{forward-word}
and @code{forward-line}. You can also set the buffer, where the
iteration takes place. It acts similar to @code{with-current-buffer}
macro.
This continuation uses syntax:
@code{(for VARIABLE chars|words|lines [in BUFFER])}, where VARIABLE
is set to the next character, word or line of the BUFFER.

@example
(++ (for i words in "*scratch*")
  (message "i: %s" i))
@end example

This example will switch to the ``*scratch*'' buffer and will then
print every word from the current point position and until the end
of the buffer.

@node permutations
@subsection Produce permutations of an array

This continuation will produce all permutations (without repeating
them) of an array by swapping array elements. This continuation
uses syntax: @code{(for VARIABLE permutations ARRAY [algo ALGORITHM])},
where VARIABLE is set to ARRAY. ARRAY is updated on every iteration
and, optionally, you can choose an algorithm. The default algorithm
used is the ``quickperm'', borrowed from @url{http://www.quickperm.org/}
Which is a simpler and a more efficient one. And a ``johnson-trotter''
algorithm, borrowed from
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steinhaus%E2%80%93Johnson%E2%80%93Trotter_algorithm}.
The distinction is that the later one will swap adjacent elements
while the former will swap any two elements each iteration.

Please note that the syntax of this continuation will probably
change in the future.

@example
(++ (for a permutations [1 2 3 4])
  (message "array: %s" a))
@end example

This example will generate all 24 permutations of the
@code{[1 2 3 4]} array.

@node dot-product join distinct
@subsection Iterate over sets

These continuations aren't implemented yet.

@comment Keyword nodes
@node Keywords
@chapter The forms available inside the iteration

These forms may serve various purposes, which can be grouped as follows:
@table @code
@item accumulators
Forms that accumulate values produced by a driver, @code{collect}, @code{hash},
@code{output}, @code{insert} and @code{reduce} belong in this group.
@item control flow
Forms that affect how the iteration is performed. They can ``fast-forward'' it
or retrieve a value from the previous state etc. @code{return}, @code{skip},
@code{previous} and @code{next} belong in this group.
@item counting
This group performs arithmetic on subsequent states of the iteration.
@code{sum}, @code{multiply}, @code{maximize}, @code{minimize} and @code{count}
all belong in this group.
@end table

@menu
* return::   Returns the control flow to the form outside the loop.
* collect::  Generates a list with the cells being the expression given.
* hash::     Generates a hash-table with the provided keys and values.
* skip::     Skips the execution of the rest of the loop body.
* previous:: Gives the value of the variable from the previous iteration.
* next::     Gives the value of the variable from the next iteration.
* output::   Prints the variable to the dedicated stream.
* insert::   Generates a vector and inserts elements into it.
* minimize:: Finds the minimum value of the variable.
* maximize:: Finds the maximum value of the variable.
* count::    Counts the number to times this expression was executed.
* sum::      Sums the values of this variable.
* multiply:: Multiplies the values of this variable.
* reduce::   General purpose accumulation handler.
@end menu

@node return
@section Unconditionally terminate the iteration

This keyword is similar to @code{break} in C language. It will unconditionally
terminate the iteration and return the value. The syntax is:
@code{(return EXPRESSION)}, where the EXPRESSION is any Lisp form.

@example
(++ (for i from 100 downto 50 by 5)
    (when (< i 75) (return i)))
@end example

This example will iterate starting at 100 and decreasing the value by 5. Once
the value is less then 75, it will return it (i.e. it will return 70).

@node collect
@section Collect values into a list

This keyword will accumulate values into a list, and, unless @code{finally}
driver is given, will return the generated list. The syntax of this keyword
is @code{(collect EXPRESSION [into VARIABLE])}, where EXPRESSION is any
Lisp form, and optional variable is the destination. You may declare this
variable with @code{with} driver to be able to initialize it before any
collection happens. If you don't declare the variable until @code{collect},
it is automatically declared.

@example
(++ (for (a b) pairs test-hash limit 100)
  (for (c d) pairs test-hash limit 120)
  (collect (list (cons a b) (cons c d)))
  (message "a: %s, b: %s, c: %s, d: %s" a b c d))
@end example

The example above iterates over two hash-tables simultaneously and collects
@code{(min 100 120)} conses, prints the collected keys and values, and
returns what was collected.

@node hash
@section Collects values into a hash-table

In a way very similar to @code{collect} collects values into a hash-table.
Similarly, you can declare the hash-table before any call to @code{hash}
takes place. @code{(hash KEY VALUE [into VARIABLE])}.

@example
(++ (for i downfrom 10 to -10 by 2)
  (hash i (* 2 i))
  (message "i: %s" i))
@end example

The example code will decrease the initial value 10 by 2 until it is less
then -10, and collect it into a hash table, where values are twice the keys.
Finally, it will return the populated hash-table.

@node skip
@section Skip the rest of the iteration body

This keyword instructs to skip the iteration body and re-enter the
iteration. This is very similar to @code{continue} keyword in C language.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node previous
@section Retrieve the previous value of the variable

This keyword retrieves the value of the variable at the previous iteration

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node next
@section Advance the iteration and retrieve the value of the variable

This keywords advances the iteration number of cycles to retrieve the next
value of the variable.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node output
@section Generate string

This keyword acts very much like @code{with-output-to-string}, in the loop
it binds ``standard-output'' to a buffer variable, where it collects the
printed content. It is possible to print to multiple separately bound
buffers to generate several strings at the same time.

@example
(++ (for i upfrom 42 to 54)
  (output 
   (if (oddp i) 
       (print (format "odd: %s" i))
     (print (format "even: %s" i))) into result))
@end example

This example will print all even numbers into a @code{result}.

@node insert
@section Collect values and insert them into array

This keyword is very similar to @code{collect}, but it uses array as
its destination.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node maximize
@section Find the largest value of a variable

This keyword finds the maximum value of a variable.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node minimize
@section Find the smallest value of a variable

This keyword finds the largest value of a variable.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node count
@section Count the number of times this keyword ran

This keyword counts the number of times it was executed.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node reduce
@section A general accumulation keyword

This keyword requires a user-provided function, which will then be called
with two arguments, the first being the output of the previous call to the
function and the second is the current value of the variable.

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node sum
@section Sums the values of the variable

This keyword sums all the values of the variable

This feature is not implemented yet.

@node multiply
@section Multiplies the values of the variable

This keyword multiplies all the values of the variable

This feature is not implemented yet.

@bye
